Role responsibility: The responsibility that is based on the role one has or plays in a certain situation.
Moral responsibility: Responsibility that is based on moral obligations, moral norms or moral duties.
Professional responsibility: The responsibility that is based on one’s role as professional in as far it stays within
the limits of what is morally allowed.

Passive responsibility: Backward-looking responsibility, relevant after something undesirable occurred; specific
forms are accountability, blameworthiness, and liability.
Accountability: Backward-looking responsibility in the sense of being held to account for, or justify one’s actions
towards others.
Blameworthiness: Backward-looking responsibility in the sense of being a proper target of blame for one’s actions
or the consequences of one’s actions. In order for someone to be blameworthy, usually the following conditions need to
apply: wrong-doing, causal contribution foreseeability, and freedom.

Active responsibility: Responsibility before something has happened
referring to a duty or task to care for certain state-of-affairs or persons.
Features:
  Adequate perception of threatened violations of norms;
  Consideration of the consequences;
  Autonomy, i.e. the ability to make one’s own independent moral decisions;
  Displaying conduct that is based on a verifiable and consistent code; and
  Taking role obligations seriously. (Bovens, 1998)
Ideals: Ideas or strivings which are particularly motivating and inspiring for the person having them, and which aim
at achieving an optimum or maximum.
Professional ideals: Ideals that are closely allied to a profession or can only be aspired to by carrying out the profession.
  Technological enthusiasm: The ideal of wanting to develop new technological possibilities and taking up technological challenges.
  Effectiveness: The extent to which an established goal is achieved.
  Efficiency: The ratio between the goal achieved and the effort required.
  Human welfare: values such as health, the environment, and sustainability

Engineers vs Managers:
Separatism: The notion that scientists and engineers should apply the technical inputs, but appropriate management and
political organs should make the value decisions.
  Tripartite model: A model that maintains that engineers can only be held responsible for the design of products
  and not for wider social consequences or concerns. In the tripartite model three separate segments are distinguished: the
  segment of politicians; the segment of engineers; and the segment of users.
  “Hired gun”: Someone who is willing to carry out any task or assignment from his employer without moral scruples.
Technocracy: government by experts
  Paternalism The making of (moral) decisions for others on the assumption that one knows better what is good for
  them than those others themselves.
Whistle-blowing The disclosure of certain abuses in a company by an employee in which he or she is employed, without the consent of his/
her superiors, and in order to remedy these abuses and/or to warn the public about these abuses.
  Guidelines for whistleblowing: organization does serious harm to public, whistleblower identified harm & reported & concluded superior does
  nothing, whistleblower exhausted internal procedures, whistleblower has evidence, whistleblower has good reason to believe that reveal threat
  = prevent harm

Social contexts:
Actor Any person or group that can make a decision how to act and that can act on that decision.
Users People who use a technology and who may formulate certain wishes or requirements for the functioning of a technology.
Regulators Organizations who formulate rules or regulations that engineering products have to meet such as rulings concerning health
and safety, but also rulings linked to relations between competitors.
Interests Things actors strive for because they are beneficial or advantageous for them.
Stakeholders Actors that have an interest (“a stake”) in the development of a technology.
Technology Assessment (TA) Systematic method for exploring future technology developments and assessing their potential societal consequences.
Collingridge dilemma: not possible to predict consequenecs of tech but cant change direction of tech dev when consequences materialize
Constructive Technology Assessment (CTA) Approach to Technology Assessment (TA) in which TA-like efforts are carried out parallel to the
process of technological development and are fed back to the development and design process.

Normative Ethics:
Ethics The systematic reflection on morality.
Morality The totality of opinions, decisions, and actions with which people express, individually or collectively, what
they think is good or right.

Descriptive ethics The branch of ethics that describes existing morality, including customs and habits, opinions
about good and evil, responsible and irresponsible behavior, and acceptable and unacceptable action.
Descriptive judgment A judgment  that describes what is actually the case (the present), what was the case
(the past), or what will be the case (the future).

Normative ethics The branch of ethics that judges morality and tries to formulate normative recommendations about how to act or live.
Normative judgment Judgment about whether something is good or bad, desirable or undesirable, right or wrong.

Values, Norms, and Virtues / Absolutism and Relativism:
Values Lasting convictions or matters that people feel should be strived for in general and not just for themselves to be
able to lead a good life or to realize a just society.
  Intrinsic value Value in and of itself.
  Instrumental value Something that is valuable in as far as it is a means to, or contributes to something else that is intrinsically
  good or valuable.
Norms Rules that prescribe what actions are required, permitted, or forbidden.
Virtues A certain type of human characteristics or qualities.

Normative relativism An ethical theory that argues that all moral points of view – all values, norms, and virtues – are equally valid.
Universalism An ethical theory that states that there is a system of norms and values that is universally applicable
to everyone, independent of time, place, or culture.
Absolutism A rigid form of universalism in which no exceptions to rules are possible.

Ethical Theories:
Consequentalism The class of ethical theories which hold that the consequences of actions are central to the moral judgment of those actions.
Utilitarianism A type of consequentialism based on the utility principle. In utilitarianism, actions are judged by the amount of pleasure and
pain they bring about. The action that brings the greatest happiness for the greatest number should be chosen.
  Hedonism The idea that pleasure is the only thing that is good in itself and to which all other things are instrumental.
  Utility principle The principle that one should choose those actions that result in the greatest happiness for the greatest number.
  Moral balance sheet A balance sheet in which the costs and benefits (pleasures and pains) for each possible action are weighed against each other.
  Cost-benefit analysis is a more modern variety of such balance sheets.
  Freedom principle The moral principle that everyone is free to strive for his/her own pleasure, as long as they do not deny or hinder the pleasure of others.
  Act utilitarianism The traditional approach to utilitarianism in which the rightness of actions is judged by the (expected) consequences of those actions.
  Rule utilitarianism A variant of utilitarianism that judges actions by judging the consequences of the rules on which these actions are based.
  These rules, rather than the actions themselves, should maximize utility.

Duty ethics Also known as deontological ethics. The class of approaches in ethics in which an action is considered morally right if it is in
agreement with a certain moral rule (law, norm, or principle).
  Categorical imperative A universal principle of the form “Do A” which is the foundation of all moral judgments in Kant’s view.
  Universality principle First formulation of the categorical imperative: Act only on that maxim which you can at the same time will that it should become a universal law.
  Reciprocity principle Second formulation of the categorical imperative: Act as to treat humanity, whether in your own person or in that of any other,
  in every case as an end, never as means only.
  Prima facie norms Prima facie norms are the applicable norms, unless they are overruled by other more important norms
  that become evident when we take everything into consideration.
  Moral autonomy The view that a person himself or herself should (be able to) determine what is morally right through reasoning.

Virtue ethics An ethical theory that focuses on the nature of the acting person. This theory indicates which
good or desirable characteristics people should have or develop to be moral.
  Practical wisdom The intellectual virtue that enables one to make the right choice for action. It consists in the ability to choose the right mean between two vices.

Argumentation:
Argument A set of statements, of which one (the conclusion) is claimed to follow from the others (the premises).
Conclusion of an argument The statement that is affirmed on the basis of the premises of the argument.
Premises The statements, which are affirmed (or assumed) as providing support or reasons for accepting the conclusion.
Valid argument An argument whose conclusion follows with necessity from its premises: if the premises are true, the conclusion must be true.
Modus ponens Form of a valid argument in which the conclusion “q” follows from the premises “p” and “if p then q.”
Modus tollens Form of a valid argument in which the conclusion “not-p" follows from the premises “if p then q” and “not-q.”
Deductive argument An argument which has a conclusion that is enclosed in (implied by) the premises.
Inductive argumentation A type of non-deductive argumentation. Argumentation from the particular to the general.
Critical questions Questions belonging to a certain type of non- deductive argumentation to check the degree of plausibility of a conclusion.
Sound argumentation An argumentation for which the corresponding critical questions can be answered positively and which therefore makes
the conclusion plausible if premises are true.

Types of argumentation:
Argumentation by analogy A type of non-deductive argumentation. An argumentation based on comparison with another situation in which the
judgment is clear. The judgment is supposed also to apply to the analogous situation.
  Desc: q comparable to p, p occurs -> r applies => q occurs -> r applies
  Crit qs: comparable - relevant similarities, relevant diff? Assertion true?
Means-end argumentation A type of non-deductive argumentation. An argumentation in which from a given end the means are derived to realize that end.
  Desc: x (the end), carrying out action y realizes x, so do y
  Crit qs: y -> x?  can carry out y? side effect of y? other ways to achieve x? x acceptable?
Proof from the absurd A deductive argumentation in which a certain proposition is proved by showing that the negation of the proposition leads to a contradiction.
  Desc: assume A -> inconsistent, so not A
  Crit qs: assume A -> inconsistent? not-A negation of A (A = not not A)?
Characteristic-judgment argumentation A type of non-deductive argumentation. An argument based on the assumption that a certain judgment about a thing or
person can be derived from certain characteristics of that thing or person.
  Desc: X has characteristics s1s2s3 typical of A => A applies to X
  Crit qs: characteristics justify A? chars typical of A? other chars necessary for A? X possess chars justify not A? X possesses chars?

Common Fallacies:
Attack on person: discredit presenter instead of argument
Confusion of law and ethics: isnt illegal => ethical
Straw person: misstate position => conclude bad argument
Wishful thinking: misinterpret facts
Naturalistic fallacy: deducing normative statements based only on descriptive statements. Stealing bikes is morally acceptable in the Netherlands, because more bikes are stolen than bought in the Netherlands
The privacy fallacy: “If you have done nothing wrong, you have nothing to worry about”
Ambiguity: use word or phrase unclearly
Fallacies of risk:
  Sheer size: X accepted, Y smaller risk than X => Y accepted
  Naturalness: X is unnatural => X not accepted
  Ostrich's: X does not have detectable risk => X not give rise to any unacceptable risk
  Delay: If wait we know more => No decision should be made
  Technocratic: Engineering issue of X dangerous => engineers should decide X is acceptable or not
  Pricing: weight risks of X against benefits => put Price on risks of X
